I had a post that's on on Twitter where
I just said you know belief makes people
perceive weakness as strength and faith
makes people seek out the company of
other faithful people other people who
share their faith because they only want
to be around people who are weak in the
same way that they're weak they feel so
threatened by anyone who actually does
challenge their beliefs or anyone who
potentially might challenge their
beliefs and this is part of the
self-selected obscurity of what cult
groups do again even if we're talking
about a political group a left-wing
communist group or a vegan group
what-have-you getting real real
pragmatic for a second here when I talk
to people who are members of cults who
are in a cult-like relationship
cult-like situation the answers you get
are complex and meaningful because these
people have to justify to you and they
have to justify themselves why the group
they're a member of rejects the
authority of projects in a sense the
surveillance of a larger you know church
group now course very often the reality
is we can't be members of a larger
Church
because they're gonna ring alarm bells
about either what's going on financially
or sexually or doctrinally they're gonna
say look you guys are what you're doing
here is madness or it's hurting people
and of course their answers may be you
know incoherent or magical they may say
well the founder of this group had a
dream and saw some demons or angels and
have a vision and again don't stop the
conference you can't just say to them
doesn't that sound ridiculous to you
because they're a cult member it's not
gonna smell particulate for them I'm
anise Yin
[Music]
how do you know if a friend of yours is
a member of a cult how do you know if a
friend of a friend of yours is a victim
of a cult mentality can put it that way
how do you define cults and cult-like
thinking this is a practical problem for
most of us in our lives even if you just
know a lot of members of your extended
family you probably know people who have
at one time or another falling into or
falling out of a cult cult-like beliefs
I would say yes I would say yes but you
know Scientology okay I've got a sneeze
coming on how long has mr. I sneezed on
camera
you know Scientology is an example
people who are sort of at the Oder rings
of Scientology people who aren't you
know closely connected to the central
organization they may not be able to see
the cult-like aspects of the
organization but yes absolutely
you know I would say Scientology's are
called and most of the there are
different academic disciplines that have
a formal checklist rather define occult
and normally included in the criteria
are how easy it is to leave like whether
not they try to keep you whether or not
they cut you off from contact with
family members who are hostile with the
cult element resort size whether or not
they have they train you in attitudes
that demonize non cult members so that
you'll insert insulate yourself against
voices of reason that'll get you to
question
call tagua there's this there's this
checklist and normally pretty high on
the checklist also is so-called
financial abuse meaning that the cult is
extracting money from its followers but
of course a lot of mainstream religions
that are not consider cults you know
extract money from their followers no
you know for me in my life I've dealt
with study you'd looked at and known
people who are victims of cults within
Buddhism within modern Buddhism Buddhism
as it exists in the rule today and a lot
of the rules and patterns for Western
cults are kind of broken they're you
know Buddhist cults are very very
different from Christian Muslim and
Jewish cults and most of the Western
world when talking about religion that's
what you're talking about Christianity
Judaism Islam and then cult groups that
more or less approximate these
leaves that differ from them but are
still derivative of them and Buddhism is
is very very different and then beyond
that also I've had to take an interest
in purely political cults cults we have
you know a cult-like mentality in a
context that isn't ostensibly religious
doesn't present itself as a religion and
for sure I mean we've had discussion
even on this channel I think up to what
extent you know for some people you know
the cult of freelee and durianrider the
cult of ratha for really was a cult-like
experience you know maybe it checks off
some of the boxes for some people for
the people who literally sold all the
furniture in their apartment so they
could sit on the floor and eat organic
mangoes straight out of a wooden box
straight out of the wooden packing crate
the same way they saw freely doing you
know on on YouTube it looks a little bit
looks a little bit cult-like but if
you've got that that long list of of
check marks a lot of them are missing
there too and for one thing for sure
it's easy to leave it's easy to leave
anytime maybe you're gonna get
durianrider cussing you out on YouTube
but you know it's uh you could leave you
leave whatever you're ready to leave for
sure you're not being trapped being
trapped inside for me but dealing with
this really really broad range of cults
and cult-like attitudes that for me
definitely included far left-wing
political calls you know communist and
crypto communist cult-like groups you
know I really felt like the one the one
crucial checkmark the one definition of
what is a cult is when people lose the
ability to make decisions for themselves
you know and that's an interesting
interesting criterion to put emphasis on
because of course you can lose that just
just across the internet you know when
you're not physically moving into a
commune or moving into a compound under
you know the people from the cult aren't
actually controlling your bank account
or anything else in your life but you
can have a cult-like mentality where you
you really stop making your own
decisions you start looking to the cult
leader to make the decisions for you
there was a there was a gay guy I had on
my channel we did a
interview discussion and I remember he
talked about on YouTube he felt like he
was in a cult-like group of durianrider
supporters and the moment when it
cracked for him was when durianrider
made his announcement that his formal
position was that being gay was a choice
and that anyone could opt at any time
and he went to these meetings with his
cata group that he met with of and the
attitude of the other people in the
group was look like it or not this is
now the party line you have to you have
to support this or get out and he
started really questioning what was
going on but that's that's amazing
because I mean again that's just it's
just a group of people you know watching
YouTube videos and again they start
doing these imitative things me without
question they start doing long-distance
cycling they start going to the gym
maybe they start sitting on the floor
instead of sitting on furniture you know
they're all these other kind of things
rolled up in the package the anti anti
medical science views the anti education
views that's all this live for your own
pleasure but then for this one guy and I
did I did talk to him for a couple hours
or something I forget you know we just
had that one conversation but I remember
was really interesting hearing from his
perspective how he had to sort of come
to a stop and question what was going on
in his life when he realized he was part
of a circle of people who weren't doing
the thinking for themselves they weren't
making that decision for themselves you
know and apparently that kind of
cult-like mentality can arise in a
totally secular setting in a weight loss
weight loss and ecology setting and it
can arise in a in a you know ornate
religious context and so on and so forth
too so you know if though if someone
asked me my girl was not my girlfriend
is not gonna ask me this question if
someone were to ask me why do people
lose the ability to make their own
decisions I think the really obvious
answer is because they want to you know
they're looking for that experience
they're looking for someone to take that
away for them you know they're looking
for that to live in that breathless
overwhelmed state where there's someone
else they regard as omnipotent or
transcendent or did
better than themselves because immuno
there were people who are like that with
communism they didn't they didn't
necessarily regard the leaders of
communism as having supernatural powers
but you know were they they wanted to
give over that part of themselves to a
movement to a church to a religious
experience you know to whatever was I
remember one of the theories of amnesia
which interests me amid the whole the
question of what is memory now doesn't
work you know when you look into it
amnesia at nisha it can be barely proven
to exist you know okay so you've all
right interesting sorry there's no that
but you know one of the fundamental
theories of amnesia is that it only
happens people forget when they want to
forget you know it's not what Hollywood
movies would make you think it is put it
that way it's not as real as sort of
tell soap operas and Hollywood movies
make it out to be but yet in most cases
you're looking at someone who wants to
forget who wants to part ways with this
this side of their their character or
their history they want to want to start
again yeah so you know I mean in the
case of my own father I regard my own
father as someone who basically had a
cult mentality that he brought to kind
of a long series of things in his life
he was I mean you know I think when my
father was involved with Christianity
which is long before I was born
I mean I think he wanted Christianity to
be that kind of cult for him he was
seeking that out you know he signed up
for he was always very left-wing he
signed up for some of these Christian
socialist groups he signed up he by his
own account assuming he wasn't lying
about this and he may have been but you
know he signed up to become a citizen of
Cuba he wanted to go join the revolution
in Cuba and you can imagine how that
cliques kind of the Christian socialism
specifically you know that it wasn't it
wasn't that his fantasy wasn't running
away to Moscow was running away to Cuba
you know joining that being a very
Catholic very Christian form of form of
communism and so on so you know but by
his own account they didn't take him
because he didn't have a respectable
enough profession at the time he was an
actor and they said with the revolution
doesn't need actors become a dentist
then come back looking freaking kick he
says if you if you've recovered that if
that is the story as he as he told it
you know so yeah I mean he was looking
for Christianity be it pardon me he was
looking for Christianity to be more than
what it was for him he was looking for
communism left-wing politics to be more
than what they possibly could be for him
I would also say even the kind of
mainstream European philosophy he
studied in university you know whatever
he was reading at the time if he was
reading cabbar mass or Nietzsche or
whatever it was reading some mainstream
philosopher Hegel or Karl Marx whatever
I think he was always looking for it to
have that that quality for him this is
very clean to me I mentioned you know
ages ago I mean in some ways I recognize
I'm I'm a little bit psychologically
abnormal myself like I've mentioned this
to you I don't feel jealousy I don't
experience jealousy and I really have to
use my imagination in a very artificial
way you know to understand how
co-workers are feelings cause even when
they feel jealousy because that is
something I have never felt you know and
I and I'm not bragging I'm not saying
this is a moral characteristic or sign
it's just it's just an oddity you know
one of the differences I really felt
between me and my my blond ex-girlfriend
I've only had one that was blondes
that's what I refer to as such but you
know I always felt like looking at her
and looking at me we grew up in the same
city in Toronto we had access to the
same library system we watched exactly
the same TV shows on television growing
up same education went to the same
schools approximately not actually the
same
yeah we went to same high school that's
where I met her you know same University
also you know there's a lot they are in
common but it seemed to me like at every
stage of her intellectual development
one of the really deep differences in
her and I was just that she was easily
overwhelmed and I wasn't you know I'd
sit down and read philosophy of
Aristotle and kind of finish with
sneering contempt like well you know and
this is overrated and you know and I
could go to an opera or you know see
some supposedly great you know symbol of
Western culture and civilization of
philosophy and politics look at Co Marx
call Mark
das kapital sorry so the masterpiece by
Omar's desk that was so built up for me
because my own parents were left-wing
extremists they regarded this as as
really more sacred than the Bible as
this you know book that changed history
and when I read it I already had a very
robust background in classical economics
I knew many of the sources Marx was was
quoting and you know again to say I was
underwhelmed is is an understatement you
know all these all these things that
were built up for me whether it was from
ancient Greece or the Bible or
philosophy or politics or religion
whatever it was and again even going
seeing great works of architecture for
me none of that was overwhelming I'm you
know most of that it's like you know
you'd see one of these great works of
art that you can kind of sneer and be
like well you know gee I guess we had to
live through five hundred years of the
Dark Ages so we could have this
cathedral built by slaves you know yeah
well good job
you did a real good job painting those
angels on the ceiling too bad there were
people literally being tortured to death
in the dungeons just around the corner
so we could have this horrible
500 years of let's see things in this
very cynical way and it wasn't phony
cynicism
it was cynicism that led to insight and
to some extent came out of you know
factual I was just not easily
overwhelmed and again like so you know
look another another thing we just came
up in conversation but I was saying to
you the other day or earlier today maybe
you know a large part of our national
identity in Canada the United States is
actually based on World War two based on
the start will do it's easy to be
overwhelming that stuff I mean you're a
child being taught about the Holocaust
you're a child being taught about
American soldiers liberating people from
concentration camps it's easy to go home
I gotta tell you I was not overwhelmed
you know all of that I was sneering at
it and I was looking at the hypocrisy
and the inconsistencies and like well
what is this stuff about the you know
the pact between Joseph Stalin and
Hitler and then all of a sudden Stalin
is our number one ally you know they're
all these weird questions if you're
looking at it and if you're just not
overwhelmed as a kid there's a lot and
what about
feign whose side was Spain on it will do
but for me these were these were
problems in the account of World War two
why was it the Canada started combat in
World War two like two years before the
Americans if the Americans were such
heroes why did they join so late
all kinds of stuff you know and of
course even much more recently though
you know the role of Japan and Japan and
Russia there's a lot of complexity there
so you see my overall view of these
things is one not being wrong this is in
the context of discussion about cults I
think a lot of people want to be
overwhelmed they want it and I remember
actually one-one cult-like group within
and Catholicism so you know there are
cults but they're not they're not quite
part of mainstream Catholicism I
remember reading an analysis of who
joined and why and it just said total
understand Allah said you know most
people who are serious about autism
there's not that much to do like once
you you know kind of once you kind of
graduated you know what see if once
you've gone through the basic rituals
these were people who were looking for
something you know within Catholicism
that would be overwhelming and give them
a sense of meaning and direction and
purpose and that the world was gonna end
and you know a grand mission and some
kind of overwhelming overwhelming set of
set of sentiments yeah anyway look so
again you at age 24 you were talking
about your girlfriend you said that
she's easily yeah
just overwhelmed yeah yeah like oh she
would hear this this history about World
War two and things well America is great
at Canada is great sure so so you know
gee I remember we once went inside a
church together her and I and the church
yrden sign slightly clever with the
architecture where they had moved
forward there's this grill there's this
set of bars that traditionally separated
the the priestly caste from the
commoners I totally forget that story
all the oldies have technical terms in
church architecture and they had built
the church so that those bars were up at
the front so you were being welcomed in
to you know it was just an architectural
shape so he's you know neoclassical this
was fake historical architecture and I
remember you know she looked at that she
thought it was such a beautiful gesture
there she broke down weeping
you know look just looking at the
looking at the church architecture you
know hearing uh hearing a choir sing you
know rousing church music or something
she could break down weeping and she
overwhelmed by that kind of thing but
sure so I'm just doing but politically
what you're saying is true too I think
it was basically impossible for her to
think in an incisive way about what the
Prime Minister of Canada and certain
partners to get it done in his career or
it failed to do or to think about what
happened in World War two and what
didn't happen because elements of it
were overwhelming because the the
emotional narrative like blots out the
kind of rational narratives you know I'm
saying yeah and you know again maybe
she's just wired that way but it maybe
it's something she she wants yeah you
know what I mean
you you've seen me weeping watching
Casablanca you know III don't I'm not
trying to get rid of that side of my
character I'm really happy that in my
late 30s I'm able to wallow in sentiment
that way you know in an appropriate time
what's what's the point of watching
Casablanca
you know and for me that is really
political it's because the movie
Casablanca has this kind of weird
political depth to it you know it's set
as Europe is falling apart and the
Holocaust is unfolding and so on sure
sure
so I've you know I'm not saying everyone
should be a rational robot I'm not
saying that at all no no I do what you
mean that could lend itself to a
cult-like mentality yeah right easily
impressed by what somebody offers you
well I think some people are seeking it
out in direct action everywhere within
veganism some people are seeking it out
within you know well whether or not
whether or not the place you seek it is
really offering you a cult laying
experience I think some people are I
don't you know I don't think I'm as
cynical is you know I'm sitting on a
different way and that like I did see
architecture like huge cathedrals when I
was a very when I was a really young
child when I was 10 you know I went to
multiple different European countries
and saw and saw things and so like hey
there was on
one trip anyway sorry you don't have to
include this but like I was just
thinking about it like I'm gonna include
it I was just getting comments on
YouTube saying you should talk more the
video though god yeah so yeah and then
again I went to Italy when I was 14 for
a choir tour and we sang in the Vatican
like we visited the Duomo in Florence we
saw like just really beautiful things
and you know I that is that is
interesting you know I wasn't brought to
tears by anything that I saw it's not
like I I was cynical for historically
you know but at the same time I wasn't
like you know I just wasn't I don't have
that that uh yeah issue that I'm like
easily impressed and I think that also
is reflected in like I'm very
unimpressed with most of vegan YouTube
like seeing seeing you your channel like
you know I was like wow this is actually
actually subsea you can dent yeah yeah
but people are going to churches and
looking to see and feel you know the
kingdom of God they're going and hoping
to feel you know there are people who
are looking for an experience there
that's something quite different from
what bricks and mortar can ever give you
and I think people are looking at you
know even Aristotle and hoping for an
experience that can't possibly be there
yeah in a book that's not just that's
not just ink and paper but a book that
is first and foremost a relic of a dead
society that's now very difficult for us
to realize I remember being amazed by
the architecture you know it had been
built so many years ago and it is such a
wonder at the time so in that sense just
human ingenuity is impressive but like
you know it wasn't it wasn't for
religious reasons that I thought it was
impressive it was just I I think I have
shown you the photos on my hard drive
when I was in Sri Lanka yeah see so
again this kind of brings it back into
this thing is related but I mean like so
I went and visited historical sites from
ancient Buddhism so architectural room
dimension Buddhism I worked on
manuscripts and ancient texts and
philosophy formation Buddhism but all
the time I was thinking about those
things analytically you know what I mean
I wasn't looking to be overwhelmed you
know and it's really sad when you see
the cult-like mentality active within
Buddhism so like you know with with
ancient sites like that and put ISM what
you're looking at really is the history
of the failure of Buddhism you know
you're looking at well yeah look we
reach this peak and then we got
slaughtered by the Muslims we got
conquered by the Hindus it was torn
apart and it's all it's all gone now
certain legs going to sleep but anyway
you know like you know what what does
this represent really you know what is
the significance of seeing these ruins
of what was once great architecture you
know I'd be in those locations but other
Buddhists would be wanting to see
something very different you know from
what I'm seeing you're looking at
failure I mean a ruin is a ruin
you know Rome is not in ruins this is a
significant difference you know Mecca is
not in ruins and the great cities of
Buddhist antiquity are their ruins
you know they got conquered they got
decimated by Islam you know first and
foremost also by certain forms of
Hinduism also by the British Empire it's
a long series of losing battles of the
history of Buddhism so what you see
there and how you relate to it and in
terms of the texts I mean it's it's
really sad because meaning should put
his philosophy many of the texts not all
many are actually written with real
cynicism they're written in a very kind
of cynical way so to see people you know
modern people wanting to get swept up
and then wanting them to be a kind of
gospel there are kind of different
layers of irony there I think I told you
about this I got an email from someone
who knew me as a scholar of Buddhism on
the on the internet asking for my
comments on a on a particular passage
from Pelican I had never seen before but
she sent me the original patli not just
an English translation and the
particular passage in Pali was you know
obviously written by an ancient Buddhist
monk and it was really saying that
meditation leads to madness now it says
more than just that but the word was
madness meaning insanity you know and
you could imagine still today if you
spend time with people
meditating you meet enough of them who
were either crazy before they got there
who are going crazy with the religious
experience you know and it was just a
really funny moment I said oh wow okay
well thanks for saying with that that's
a really interesting excerpt I say you
know different passages of the pali
canon reflect the perspectives of
different authors already that was
shocking to the person i was writing to
like you know just like some christians
want to imagine the whole bible is and
i'll magically written by by god you
know like as if the polly cat is written
by one author it's not but so this is an
especially kind of cynical or nihilistic
author and this this is really warning
you that you know meditation leads to
madness interesting this was you know
preserved within the the buddhist canon
this is obviously an opinion or a
perspective that's hostile to a lot of
other scriptures you can read that are
literally bound into the same book you
don't mean terms of contrasting is and
yeah the first time starting to you to
them this this was just mind-blowing
you know what is it they're wanting
buddhism to be they're wanting it to be
univocal and yoonah focal and you know
by what you mean to speak with one voice
to have one focus one direction one
purpose and to provide them with a
meaning in their life that's that's just
not there in terms of why those texts
were written and and so on see i was i
was always in this position of saying
like well look guys why can't we work
with these ancient texts the same way we
work with shakespeare or Aristotle or
you know Socrates like you know this
stuff is valuable it's worth studying in
its own way but let's not pretend you
know what it means something doesn't
mean let's let's not pretend as evaluate
it doesn't has it doesn't have but then
you're you're really always crashing
into the Coleman the cult mentality and
again keeping it all the way real most
the people I was dealing with in
Buddhism they've been around long enough
that they'd kind of outgrown the cult
mentality like maybe 20 years earlier
when they first started to become a
scholar of bosom they were actually cult
members I knew cases of that where they
started off as members of a cult with a
capital C notorious cults that had you
know clandestine anal sex and financial
abuse and the whole bit cuz
there are buddhist monks who are
closeted homosexuals and we're supposed
to touch money well that's right they're
not supposed to touch money they're not
supposed to touch anyone's penis not
even their own they're supposed to live
in total celibacy and there were a lot
of cults where sexual abuse is also a
part of the the pattern with you know
this notion of power what have you you
know but a lot of people I knew they
kind of grown out of that and we're
still haunted by that when I knew them
they'd grown up into being a scholar of
another kind but then when you talk to
them you saw they had never really dealt
with they'd never really dealt with
those skeletons in their closet with how
they got involved Buddhism in the first
place and they never dealt with the
contrast in what they know and
understand now and what they had
believed or wanted to believe you know
beforehand so getting real real
pragmatic for a second here when I talk
to people who are members of cults over
in a cult-like relationship cult-like
situation you know I asked a question
which I've raised on this channel before
or 200 videos going in a very different
context one of the first questions I ask
them is okay so your cult your your
group your your member of why aren't you
going to the local Anglican Church so if
they're a member of a Christian college
the cult I asked them why aren't you
going to a mainstream Christian Church
now if it was a Muslim cult it parallel
will be asking about Islam I've raised
this repeatedly in Buddhism when I'm
talking to white people who don't have
any answer for why they're part of a
weird fringe group that I would either
consider a cult or just to have
absolutely no legitimacy well okay if
this is what you believe and if this is
what you preach within Buddhism why are
you a member of a mainstream church like
the CM nakiya from Sri Lanka why aren't
you you know why aren't you a member of
any of the mainstream Buddhist
organizations that have a formal formal
government status and millions of
adherents and you know properties and
procedures and bureaucracy why aren't
you a member of the equivalent of the
Catholic Church of the Anglican Church
within Buddhism now I don't ask that as
a simple shallow rebuke that's not the
end of the conversation so
I'm talking to a friend who's part of a
weird Christian cult the answers you get
are complex and meaningful because these
people have to justify to you and they
have to justify it to themselves why the
group they're a member of rejects the
authority of rejects in a sense the
surveillance of a larger you know church
group and of course very often the
reality is we can't be members of a
larger church group because they're
gonna ring alarm bells about either
what's going on financially you're
sexually or doctrinally they're gonna
say look you guys are what you're doing
here is madness or it's hurting people
they're gonna raise that and you you
might think I'm putting a lot of faith
in the Anglican Church but actually this
is something I think the Anglo churches
you know any of those mainstream groups
are really accustomed to dealing with
you know of course it's a judgment call
for whoever whoever in that mainstream
group is dealing with you getting
someone who's in a cult or in a
cult-like situation to recognize that
they are insulating themselves in the
larger society that they're insulating
themselves against criticism even from
members of the mainstream Church you
know they're they may claim to be
connected to you know so why is it you
have to separate yourself from all other
Christians and be in this self-selected
obscurity of this group why is it you
have to separate yourself from all
sources all the mainstream Buddhist
sources of authority and be in this
group now it's possible they have a good
answer like it's possible you could talk
to someone in Buddhism and they'd say
well look I'm really a scholar and what
I do is really scholarly and the
mainstream religion doesn't deal with
that so therefore I'm part of this group
of scholars and they may say but yeah
I'd be delighted to have more of an open
door to the mainstream religion and have
more let's try to set that up let's try
to have more cooperation with the
mainstream Church but what we do is
really so once in a while there may be
there may be a positive answer but just
if you can sit down face-to-face and get
someone to talk through with you why are
you a member of this self selected
special group and not of the other group
and of course their answers maybe you
know incoherent or magical they may say
well the founder of the screw
had a dream and saw some demons or
angels and had a vision and because of
that he started his own church fine
okay but why wouldn't he just join up
with the Anglican Church or the Catholic
Church or this mainstream but it's so
what is the reason why isn't that he's
pulling you away from your family and
your job or any other Church it seems
and you know they may have an answer
that's magical within their group of
saying well he says that the mainstream
Church is corrupt and evil and what
we're gonna do is pure and so on and
again don't stop the conference you
can't just say to them doesn't that
sound ridiculous to you because they're
a cult member it's not gonna stick
you-let's to them you know another if
there were other people in the room they
might be standing there saying doesn't
that sound ridiculous to you because
okay but what what's your role don't you
have compassion for the people who are
the members of the mainstream Church or
the mainstream Buddhist organization if
they're so misled if their organization
so is so corrupt why can't you reach out
to them why can't you be involved why
can't you be part of the same
congregation and so on to keep
challenging them on this issue of of
isolation
now the other criterion that I've
alluded to is this question of losing
your ability to make decisions I had a
post that's on on Twitter where I just
said you know belief makes people
perceive weakness as strength and faith
makes people seek out the company of
other faithful people other people who
share their faith because they only want
to be around people who are weak in the
same way that they're weak they feel so
threatened by anyone who actually does
challenge their beliefs or anyone who
potentially might challenge their
beliefs and this is part of the
self-selected obscurity of what cult
groups do again even if we're talking
about a political group a left-wing
communist group or a vegan group or
what-have-you this can emerge in not so
not so not so overtly religious
circumstances I think what's what's
really hard you've got to be face to
face you can't do this by email but when
you're when you're with someone who has
that cult-like mentality and there's any
issue like this like even the gay rights
issue where they basically say to you oh
I can't I can't make up my mind I have
to ask
leader I have to ask the person in
charge of the in charge of the called
what's really powerful you can do it is
to sit down and ask them why
whatever the decisions are because I
mean you know people who are members of
cults they may not make their own
decisions but what kind of cool thing
they wear you know they mean there may
be seemingly trivial things that have
taken on a sense of gravitas and
transcendental importance those
decisions now be made by the cult but
what have you financial decisions
decisions but their own future decisions
about their love life who they're gonna
marry whether they should break up with
her boyfriend when they go and ask the
cult leader they go and ask the Buddhist
monk but you know whether or not that
you break up with your boyfriend or not
and it's not just guidance it's not you
know it's not getting a second opinion
where it really is that person you know
making your decisions for you I think
the hardest thing but the most crucial
thing is try to challenge them on that
issue of when and where did you lose the
capacity to make your own decisions and
I think most of the time people do that
because they they wanted to they wanted
that sense of abandoned they wanted to
be part of a larger whole all those all
those reasons that the people have for
forgetting multikills yeah if I identify
with this term nihilism and nihilist as
a critique of a belief as a rejection of
belief and you know I see wanting to
believe as a real sickness in mankind
you know I think if you got that in you
whether we're talking about example like
my father or what have you I think the
people who want to believe the people
who want to be overwhelmed will kind of
shuffle from one one cult to another or
they'll make a cult out of something
where there maybe isn't even the raw
material there to make a cult out of you
know I see that as part of kind of the
tragedy of the human condition but it's
not universal
I mean not everyone feels that way and
not everyone feels that whether their
whole lives I mean you know I I think I
think a lot of the scholars I knew in
Buddhism that were in that tragic
position where it was like well they
wanted to believe I mean for example
reincarnation that's a real that's a
religious belief in this you know if you
actually believe in this maybe at some
point they weren't
the Buddhism they really did believe in
reincarnation they really did believe in
meditation and then after those beliefs
had died after they outlived them and
after also they maybe got more
sophisticated in terms of actually
reading the scripture and seeing the
huge gulf between what the ancient
scriptures say and what modern people
want to say about them what's left in
your life when now your whole profession
and your identity is tied to this
religion but you can't believe anymore
you know your beliefs are dead and
you're still walking around living
without them you know and look I think
those are the people I met in left-wing
politics too I think most of the people
I knew in left-wing politics including
just mainstream you know NDP Canada's
left-wing party the new Democrat Party I
think they got involved with left-wing
politics at an earlier time of the lives
when they really believed in something
about them that brought them there and
then you know you learned that the
party's corrupt and you learned that
you're never going to comprehend any
those goals you'll learn all kinds of
things as you get older and then well
maybe you're still involved in that
party whether it's the Communist Party
or the new democratic party or so I mean
it's not necessarily an extreme party
but then you know life life continues
after belief you know as has ended
that's it's not Universal this is
because I don't live that way I don't
think that way I don't feel that way my
involvement in politics has never been
like that but I think this is a mass
phenomenon for millions and millions of
human beings that they live their lives
wanting to believe and then questioning
what they're going to do once they once
they run out of belief